# AutismCordBloodMethylation
Analysis of DNA methylation data by whole-genome bisulfite sequencing in umbilical cord blood from ASD and TD subjects in the MARBLES and EARLI studies. (In Progress)

## Article: Cord blood methylome from newborns later diagnosed with autism spectrum disorder reflects early dysregulation of neurodevelopmental and X-linked genes

***Background:*** Autism spectrum disorder (ASD) is a male-biased neurodevelopmental disorder with complex genetic etiology. Since the neonatal epigenome has the potential to reflect past interactions between diverse genetic and environmental factors during embryonic development, we performed whole-genome bisulfite sequencing in 152 umbilical cord blood samples from the MARBLES and EARLI high-risk prospective cohorts to identify an integrative epigenomic signature of ASD at birth. 

***Results:*** We identified differentially-methylated regions (DMRs) stratified by sex that discriminated ASD from control cord blood samples in discovery and replication sets. At a locus level, 7 DMRs in males and 31 DMRs in females replicated across two independent groups of subjects, while 537 DMR genes in males and 1762 DMR genes in females replicated by gene association. ASD DMR-associated genes were significantly enriched for brain and embryonic expression, X chromosome location, and prior epigenetic studies of ASD in brain and other tissues. In males and females, autosomal DMRs were significantly enriched for promoter and bivalent chromatin states across most cell types, while sex differences were observed in enriched chromatin states of X-linked ASD DMRs. Lastly, cord blood ASD DMRs were significantly enriched for binding sites of methyl-sensitive transcription factors relevant to fetal brain development.

***Conclusions:*** At birth, prior to the diagnosis of ASD, a distinct DNA methylation signature was detected in umbilical cord blood over regulatory regions and genes relevant to the embryonic brain. Differential cord methylation in ASD reinforces the developmental and sex-biased etiology of ASD, and provides novel insights for early diagnosis and therapies.
